Keep remote pipelines up to date documentation (#173)
konflux-ci/docs: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/how-tos/workflows/keep-remote-pipelines-up-to-date.adoc

> = Maintaining remote Tekton pipelines up to date

Reviewer: General comment on structure of this page. If we create a structure similar to the git submodule approach, I think that this page would have sections like:

(brief description of the problem we are trying to solve)
* Implementing this guideline
  * Basic definitions
  * Create a reference component (see comment about naming the component)
  * Configure renovate
  * Configure additional components with the remote resolver
* Benefits of this guideline
* Potential drawbacks

Author: This change required a hard refactor of the documentation. Please re-review it.

> = Maintaining remote Tekton pipelines up to date

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
= Maintaining remote Tekton pipelines
```
reason as above

[IMPORTANT]
====

> * This article assumed knowledge of link:https://tekton.dev/docs/pipelines/resolution/[Tekton remote pipelines]. If this is not the case, please read more about this feature before proceeding.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* This article assumes knowledge of link:https://tekton.dev/docs/pipelines/resolution/[Tekton remote pipelines]. If this is not the case, please read more about this feature before proceeding.
```

> * This article took for granted the reader knows what a link:https://tekton.dev/docs/pipelines/resolution/[Tekton remote pipeline] is. If this is not the case, please read more about this feature before proceeding.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* This article assumed knowledge of link:https://tekton.dev/docs/pipelines/resolution/[Tekton remote pipelines]. If this is not the case, please read more about this feature before proceeding.
```

====

== The advantage of using a remote pipeline

> This approach allows a team or an individual contributor to manage plenty of Pipelines from a single repository as source of truth. But there also other good reasons:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This approach allows a team or an individual contributor to manage multiple custom Pipelines from a single repository as source of truth. But there also other good reasons:
```

. Pipelines are stored in a Git repository and fetched during execution, eliminating the need to maintain local or static pipeline definitions.

> . Teams can leverage Git’s versioning to access specific pipeline branches

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Teams can leverage Git’s versioning to access specific pipeline branches.
```

> . In case of issues, it's very simple to rollback to a previous pipeline version, and apply it globally among the Konflux Components.

Reviewer: It is possible to roll back to previous versions without this remote pipeline strategy as well. I guess that the suggestion is to rollback the reference pipeline commit based on the use of a floating branch tag? If you are suggesting that it is easy to roll back, I think we should document that in this page.

Author: > I guess that the suggestion is to rollback the reference pipeline commit based on the use of a floating branch tag?
Yup, that's exactly what I meant. Let me specify it better

Author: I was not thinking about using a floating branch tag, I have not tested it despite I suppose it works out of the box. I would leave it as it is and we could always edit this page in the future eventually to add more details or strategies.

> . Reduced maintenance overhead

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Reduced maintenance overhead of keeping task references up to date across multiple components.
```

Reviewer 3: There is more maintenance overhead. For example: if you need custom tasks in all of your pipelines, if you manage different versions through the project controller you need to update all branches as well if you change something in a task

Author: Mmmh, why would you target a different revision/branch everywhere? Can't you just test your changes on a branch updating a single component and then open a PR against main/devel branch?

To start referencing a remote Pipeline from a PipelineRun using a *git resolver*, replace *pipelineSpec* with *pipelineRef*:

[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1
kind: PipelineRun
metadata: ... # Omitted for brevity
spec:

>   params: ... # Omitted for brevity

Reviewer: Instead of adding comments into the yaml blocks, we can use the `<.>` pattern for adding footnotes like we do elsewhere (i.e. [create-release.adoc](https://github.com/konflux-ci/docs/blob/main/docs/modules/ROOT/pages/advanced-how-tos/releasing/create-release.adoc?plain=1)).

  pipelineRef:
    resolver: git
    params:
      - name: org
        value: redhat
      - name: scmType
        value: gitlab
      - name: serverURL
        value: https://gitlab.cee.redhat.com
      - name: url

>         value: "https://gitlab.cee.redhat.com/your-group-name/your-repo-name.git"

Reviewer: Let's use an externally familiar URL here.

      - name: revision

>         value: main # Specify a branch to target

Reviewer: It is possible to reference a specific revision as well. I guess the benefit of using a "floating" reference like this is that the rest of the components get updates without having to get a nudge. They will get the updates in their next commit.

Author: I wanted to show that's possible to set a branch name. Should we replace it with "{{revision}}"?

      - name: pathInRepo
        value: "pipelines/your-pipeline-name.yaml" # Internal repository path to your pipeline definition YAML file
      - name: token
        value: pipelines-as-code-secret # Name of the Secret
      - name: tokenKey

>         value: password # Name of the attribute within your Secret, that stores the password/token

Reviewer: Does this refer to a specific secret that we mention elsewhere in the documentation? If so, can we refer to the page that describes the process as well?

Is this secret ever _not_ needed? I guess if the target can be anonymously accessed (like in a public GitHub repo)?

Author: - It's mentioned https://konflux.pages.redhat.com/docs/users/how-tos/configuring/creating-secrets.html
- For the latter question, I am not sure this is mandatory to be specified, but I wanted to show the more complex example, so that the easier one (without secret) would be simpler to reproduce.

  workspaces: ... # Omitted for brevity
----

== The drawback of having a remote pipeline

> Although Tekton remote pipelines is a huge improvement, it comes with a drawback; the Pipeline CRDs will not be stored in the Konflux Component repository anymore, so MintMaker will not be able to update the TaskRef digests for us.

Reviewer: I think that this slightly misrepresents the situation. There is no pipeline CRD, but the Component CR has a reference to the specific pipeline that was used/requested when onboarding (or [reconfigured](https://github.com/konflux-ci/docs/blob/main/docs/modules/ROOT/pages/how-tos/configuring/reconfiguring-build-pipeline.adoc)).

MintMaker doesn't update the TaskRefs because anything is in the CR, but because those task references are in a "known" location.

== The solution

> To workaround the above issue, the suggested approach is to onboard the repository where the shared pipelines are stored as a Konflux Component, so that Konflux and MintMaker will be able to discover and update digests for us.

Reviewer: Should we give this location of the shared pipelines a name to make it easier to refer to? For example a common pipeline component or reference component (I don't think that my naming suggestions are that good right now).

Author: Could you rephrase your idea? I am not sure I get it

.*Prerequisites*

> * Having a repository where to store shared Pipelines and Tasks.

Reviewer: Is this not a prerequisite for the entire workflow? Or is it possible to achieve this workflow without this?

Author: Yeah it's a prerequisite for the entire workflow, should I move it under another section or paragraph?

> * Having a repository where to store shared Pipelines and Tasks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Having a repository to store shared Pipelines and Tasks.
```

[IMPORTANT]
====
If the repository is private, be sure to have a Secret in place on Konflux to be able to clone it
====

.*Procedures*

. Add Tekton Pipelines and Tasks in the repository. A suggested repository structure would be:

+
[source,shell]
----
.
├── .tekton
│   ├── <repository-name>-pipelines-pull-request.yaml # Used by Konflux to listen to pull requests

> │   └── <repository-name>-pipelines-push.yaml # Used by Konflux to listen to pushes

Reviewer: These PipelineRun files should reference the common pipelines (and by extension common tasks) below, right?

├── pipelines
│   ├── remote-pipeline1.yaml

> │   └── remote-pipeline2.yaml

Reviewer: I feel like the general recommendation _might_ be to have a reference component build for each of these pipelines (i.e. if you have a single arch and multi-arch pipeline, one component that exercises each in a way that is representative for your other components). This would enable the CI for _this_ repo to catch when task/pipeline updates will present issues downstream.

Author: Are you suggesting to rename the pipelines with some more descriptive namings?

├── tasks
│   ├── remote-task1.yaml
│   └── remote-task2.yaml
└── renovate.json #Renovate/MintMaker configuration
----

. Configure and extend MintMaker properly, so that it will be able to discover Tekton Pipelines and take care of them in custom paths:

+
[source,json]
.renovate.json
----
{
  "$schema": "https://docs.renovatebot.com/renovate-schema.json",
  "tekton": {
    "fileMatch": ["\\.yaml$", "\\.yml$"], // Tekton pipelines to match
    "includePaths": ["pipelines/**", "tasks/**"], // Paths where to look for Tekton Pipelines to update
    "automerge": true // Define whether MintMaker must take care of PRs and automerge them or not
  }
}
----

+
[NOTE]
====
* MintMaker will read the default configuration from "https://docs.renovatebot.com/renovate-schema.json" and will extend it using the subsequent custom settings.
====

> . xref:how-tos/creating.adoc[Create a Konflux Application and a Konflux Component] where to reference the repository and branch name.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. xref:how-tos/creating.adoc[Create a Konflux Application and a Konflux Component] to reference the repository and branch name.
```

= Maintaining remote Tekton pipelines

[IMPORTANT]
====
* This article assumes knowledge of link:https://tekton.dev/docs/pipelines/resolution/[Tekton remote pipelines]. If this is not the case, please read more about this feature before proceeding.
====

== Implementing this guideline

.*Prerequisites*

* Having a repository to store shared Pipelines and Tasks.

[IMPORTANT]
====

> If the repository is private, be sure to have a Secret in place on {ProductName} to be able to clone it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the repository is private, be sure to have a Secret in your {ProductName} workspace to be able to clone it
```
Is this the same as the secret configuration for cloning repositories? Is there any additional documentation that we can link to in order to help manage the step?

Author: It's the one specified in the pipelineRef, in the example is named "pipelines-as-code-secret" 
```
pipelineRef:
    resolver: git
    params:
      - name: org
        value: redhat
      - name: scmType
        value: gitlab
      - name: serverURL
        value: https://gitlab.cee.redhat.com
      - name: url
        value: "https://gitlab.cee.redhat.com/your-group-name/your-repo-name.git"
      - name: revision
        value: main # Specify a branch to target
      - name: pathInRepo
        value: "pipelines/your-pipeline-name.yaml" # Internal repository path to your pipeline definition YAML file
      - name: token
        value: pipelines-as-code-secret # Name of the Secret
      - name: tokenKey
        value: password # Name of the attribute within your Secret, that stores the password/token
```

Author: Accepted your suggestion and added a reference to this page: https://konflux.pages.redhat.com/docs/users/how-tos/configuring/creating-secrets.html

====

=== Basic definitions

.*Procedures*

. Add Tekton Pipelines and Tasks in the repository. A suggested repository structure would be:

+
[source,shell]
----
.
├── .tekton
│   ├── <repository-name>-pipelines-pull-request.yaml # Used by {ProductName} to listen to pull requests

> │   └── <repository-name>-pipelines-push.yaml # Used by {ProductName} to listen to pushes

Reviewer: nit: I don't know if listen is the right action. Maybe trigger pipelines on those events?

Author: What about "Use by Konflux to react to pull requests/pushes"?

Reviewer 2: # Used by {ProductName} to monitor pull requests
# Used by {ProductName} to monitor pushes

Author: Accepted swadeley's suggestion. Ty!
